Wireless communication is one of the most vibrant areas in the communication field
today. While it has been a topic of study since the 1960's, the past decade has seen a
surge of research activities in the area. This is due to a confluence of several factors.
First is the explosive increase in demand for tetherless connectivity, driven so far
mainly by cellular telephony but is expected to be soon eclipsed by wireless data
applications. Second, the dramatic progress in VLSI technology has enabled small-area
and low-power implementation of sophisticated signal processing algorithms and coding
techniques. Third, the success of second-generation (2G) digital wireless standards,
in particular, the IS-95 Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) standard, provides
a concrete demonstration that good ideas from communication theory can have a
significant impact in practice. The research thrust in the past decade has led to a much
richer set of perspectives and tools on how to communicate over wireless channels, and
the picture is still very much evolving.
There are two fundamental aspects of wireless communication that make the prob-
lem challenging and interesting. These aspects are by and large not as significant in
wireline communication. First is the phenomenon of fading: the time-variation of the
channel strengths due to the small-scale effect of multipath fading, as well as larger
scale effects such as path loss via distance attenuation and shadowing by obstacles.
Second, unlike in the wired world where each transmitter-receiver pair can often be
thought of as an isolated point-to-point link, wireless users communicate over the air
and there is significant interference between them in wireless communication. The
interference can be between transmitters communicating with a common receiver (e.g.
uplink of a cellular system), between signals from a single transmitter to multiple re-
ceivers (e.g. downlink of a cellular system), or between different transmitter-receiver
pairs (e.g. interference between users in different cells). How to deal with fading and
with interference is central to the design of wireless communication systems, and will
be the central themes of this book. Although this book takes a physical-layer per-
spective, it will be seen that in fact the management of fading and interference has
ramifications across multiple layers.
Traditionally the design of wireless systems has been focused on increasing the
reliability of the air interface; in this context, fading and interference are viewed as
nuisances that are to be countered. Recent focus has shifted more towards increasing
the spectral efficiency; associated with this shift is a new point of view that fading
can be viewed as an opportunity to be exploited. The main objective of the book is
to provide a unified treatment of wireless communication from both these points of
view. In addition to traditional topics such as diversity and interference averaging,
a substantial portion of the book will be devoted to more modern topics such as
opportunistic and multi-input multi-output (MIMO) communication.
An important component of this book is the system view emphasis: the successful
implementation of a theoretical concept or a technique requires an understanding of
how it interacts with the wireless system as a whole. Unlike the derivation of a concept
or a technique, this system view is less malleable to mathematical formulations and
is primarily acquired through experience with designing actual wireless systems. We
try to help the reader develop some of this intuition by giving numerous examples
of how the concepts are applied in actual wireless systems. Five examples of wireless
systems are used. The next section gives some sense of the scope of the wireless systems
considered in this book.